Document release notes (#5975)
nextflow-io/nextflow: docs/migrations/strict-syntax.md

# Preparing for strict syntax

This page explains how to update Nextflow scripts and config files to adhere to the {ref}`Nextflow language specification <syntax-page>`, also known as the _strict syntax_.

:::{note}
If you are still using DSL1, see {ref}`dsl1-page` to learn how to migrate your Nextflow pipelines to DSL2 before consulting this guide.
:::

:::{versionadded} 25.02.0-edge
The strict syntax can be enabled in Nextflow by setting the environment variable `NXF_SYNTAX_PARSER=v2`.
:::

## Overview

The strict syntax is a subset of DSL2. While DSL2 allows any Groovy syntax, the strict syntax allows only a subset of Groovy syntax for Nextflow scripts and config files. This new specification enables more specific error reporting, ensures more consistent code, and will allow the Nextflow language to evolve independently of Groovy.

The strict syntax will eventually become the only way to write Nextflow code, and new language features will be implemented only in the strict syntax, with few exceptions. Therefore, it is important to prepare for the strict syntax in order to maintain compatibility with future versions of Nextflow and be able to use new language features.

> This page describes the key differences between the DSL2 and the strict syntax. In general, the amount of changes that are required depends on the amount of custom Groovy code in your scripts and config files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page outlines the key differences between DSL2 and the strict syntax. The extent of required changes will vary depending on the level of custom Groovy code used within your scripts and configuration files.
```
